---
layout: page
title: Hunter weapon sound effects and animations
tagline: Entry#1
description: Why guns suck and bows don't in the World of Warcraft
---

In recent years there was a trend of including bows in many triple A games. Honestly, I am not the biggest fan of that development, because I prefer guns from an aesthetic standpoint. So, if I can pick a gun or a bow in a game, you can rely on me taking the gun. WoW is one of the few games that makes me take the bow. Unfortunately this is not because bows are so well designed (they are good though), but because guns are very unsatisfying for me in both sound and animation.

Lets start with the animations. There are slightly different animations based on the race you are playing. Orcs have an animation like they are priming an old American Civil War rifle, female Draenei look like they are reloading a pump action shotgun. The latter is okay for rifles but looks totally ridiculous on crossbows. Same goes for the orc animation when applied to crossbows. There should be different animations for bows, crossbows, and rifles. Erase the race specific animations and just improve the animations of the weapons used and implement multiple different animations for different abilities.

Good example for that is the Aimed Shot. It cast about two seconds, modified by haste or true shot of course, and in this time the hunter takes an arrow out, puts it into his bow and pulling it back. Then there is some time left where he rests in the maximum drawn out position, aiming so to speak, and then he fires when the castbar finishes. This looks and feels very satisfying because the whole idea we have of somebody placing a aimed shot is shown. If you are using a gun in the other hand, the character makes a very short, reloading animation and then rests about three quarters of the remaining cast time in an aiming position. This feels way too long, or the other way round, it doesn't give the player something to spectate while waiting and does not fulfil the imaginations we have about guns (at least for me). If we would imagine the animation of the bow to be like that, the character would just start drawing his bow, with an arrow magically appearing. The comparison of the two animations and their degree of fun for the user points to the age old credo of "show, don't tell". For rifles, the game *shows* me an animation for one fourth of the cast time, and then just *tells* me via the cast bar and cast time what my character is doing. You might say: Of course, your character is just aiming the rest of the time. But it is the same animation as he is when only auto-shooting, but exactly there lies the problem. Because the same animation for normal shooting (and all other abilities) is used for the Aimed Shot as well. Aimed Shot is *the* signature ability of the Marksman spec and it looks like every other shooting ability. That is unsatisfying for the player.

Now you might object, that there is a blue crosshair animation on the targeted unit, to make up for that, and you are right. Unfortunately my personal problem with an unsatisfying way of handling rifle animations in WoW persists, especially, because the bow is better in that respect and I think rifles can be improved in this aspect.


**Sound**

Regarding sounds the riles once again are the ones coming up short. The bow sounds are once again fine and satisfying for me, while the rifles are not. I always disliked the new gun sounds they implemented and what makes it worse for me is that abilities like Rapid Fire still use the old sounds so I get  reminded how much better the old ones where. (But, like Rapid Fire, it is good to use some different sounds for different abilities, to give them more impact!) On a purely qualitative level the new sounds are better, true, but the main problem arises when the gun sounds are combined with all the others sound that the abilities make in addition to the shot sound. The shooting just gets drowned out by some snake sizzling or arcane magic sound. This is maybe just a problem of frequency and could then be easily solved with an EQ or other sound processing.

The current sound may also be more authentic, but here once again, like *show don't tell*, I want to bring something in we learned from the movies. Sound effects in movies are always "larger than life" - Most of the sounds we hear in a movie are over the top and not realistic. Almost every sound in an action film is somehow modified or altered or another one inserted on top of it in post production. I our media rich world today we have very clear expectations how some things have to sound in a movie, but if you check those sounds in the real world they are often very underwhelming compared to the film. Just look up videos on what tricks sound engineers use to generate all kinds of sounds artificially to make them seem more realistic. It is not coincidence that coconuts are used for horse hooves sounds in The Life of Brian. 
